Now, that we have some idea of the purpose of encoding,
it's helpful to review a few ways to encode that are commonly used.
In this video, we'll look into the basics of three common ways to
encode data: ASCII, hexadecimal, and Base64.
Different types of encoding are used for different purposes,
and there are a few important details to review about each type of encoding.
We won't be going into a lot of depth here.
All we need is the basic understanding of how these types of encoding work.
If you're interested in learning more about these,
we've put a lot of links to resources below that you can follow and learn more.
First, let's look at ASCII.
ASCII is short for the American Standard Code for Information Interchange.
It's based on the idea that you can represent text as numbers.
Here's an ASCII table.
As you can see on the chart,
by laying out a series of characters and letters,
you can now reference the corresponding number associated with its character.
For example, P is equal to 112,
Q is 113, and so on.
It maps the text we write into numbers that computers
recognize using binary to transmit information.
To check this out for yourself,
you can head over to any basic online ASCII converter.
This and other encoding schemes have tools available online that you can experiment with.
Over on unit-conversion.info, we can do
a quick demo showing an example of converting text to ASCII.
Here if I type in P,
we get 112 just like we mentioned.
Q gives us 113 and you'll notice that even the space has its own number shown here as 32.
This extends to anything we want to type like blockchain developer,
your name, or an entire book.
These same basic ideas are what's used for
all encoding including Hexadecimal, which we'll look at next.
Hexadecimal encoding is pretty common.
It's a more concise and human-readable representation
of binary often used by programmers.
Something encoded in Hexadecimal will be
represented using numbers from zero to nine or letters
from A to F. Here's a chart showing the basic conversion between binary and Hexadecimal.
When encoding a document,
these values are translated into their Hexadecimal equivalent.
It's more common to work directly with Hexadecimal when using assembly languages.
It's a way for developers to allocate memory more
quickly than specifying space using binary digits.
If you're interested, you can head over to the website
convertstring.com to try converting data to Hexadecimal for yourself.
Type your text in the top,
click Hex Encode and check out the encoding down here at the bottom.
Over at blockchain developer again to see how this looks.
If you take the time to break this down,
you'll see that it follows the zero to nine,
A to F format that was shown in the chart earlier.
Finally, Base64 is another encoding scheme
meant to represent data as numbers in a string format.
It does this by converting information into any
one of 64 different characters shown on this chart.
So as you can see, A equals zero,
B equals one and so on through
both upper and lowercase letters along with a few characters.
Using this chart, you can convert any text you'd like into its Base64 equivalent.
Like before, we can check out a website to see this for ourselves.
Over at base64encode.org, you can demo converting text into Base64.
Similar to before, I'll type in blockchain developer,
hit encode and then I can check out the Base64 encoded version of this text.
So, there's a quick overview of a few different encoding schemes;
ASCII, Hexadecimal, and Base64.
There's a few other types of encoding out there.
They all serve the main function of converting
our human-readable media into
computer-readable formats that can be more easily transmitted.
For us, it's important that we recognize these different formats,
so we can begin to work with them for ourselves.
There's plenty of resources to understand each of these in
more depth and I linked a few of my favorites down below the video.
Feel free to check these out to better understand each of
these encodings and play around with some of them for yourself.